לא

WESTERN
========

lou {Sprach-Meister 1742}

Loo kom!  לא קום 'It won't arise again, i.e., there won't be another one like him'
{FRANKFURT, Tendlau №52}
	•	Das is e Mann, loo kom! {№52}
	•	Loo poga weloo noga!  לא פגע ולא נגע 'It doesn't fit here' {№94}
	•	Loo pock weloo nock! (the folksy pronunciation) {№94}
	•	Loo Bock weloo Klotz! 'No goat and no block!' {№104}

lou {HOLLAND, Beem, Jerosche}
	•	Mool jou, mool lou. 'Sometimes yes, sometimes no. It is actually indifferent to me.' {Jerosche №408}
	•	Lou hôje, welou nĭwre. 'Was not and was not created. Said of a made-up story. Based on Bawa Batra 15a, where one of the scholars claims that Job never existed, but is only an allegory.' {Jerosche №570}
	•	Lou jesochre, welou jepokde. 'They should not be remembered. Applied to Israel's sins. Later: cursing in general.' {Jerosche №571}
Tendlau 442.
Zivy 95.
Heine (Lamentationen 6): "Nicht gedacht soll seiner werden  Aus dem Mund der armen alten Esther Wolf hört' ich die Worte  Die ich treu im Sinn behalten."
	•	Lou lone schteit in hallel. '"Not us" is written in Hallel. Advice, to omit something. Lou lone are the first words of Psalm 115, which with the psalms 113-118 forms the festive prayer Hallel.' {Jerosche №572}
	•	Lou mit 'n olf. 'Absolutely not.' {Jerosche №573}
Bernst. 137 - Ober gur "loj" mit an alef.
	•	Lou pôge, welou nôge. 'It does not affect not and it does not touch. It does not touch either side or shore.' {Jerosche №574}
V.P. 179 - lou poga', welou noga'.
Tendlau 94 - Loo poga weloo noga.
Weill 420.

lau harbə 'nicht viel' {SWITZERLAND, Fleischer 2005}

CENTRAL
========

HASIDIC
=======
= AMERICA = 

/loj mɪt a ˈaləf/ לא מיט אַ אַלף (why not אַן אַלף?)