---
fileClass: DictionaryEntry
headword: בילן
part_of_speech: 
etymology: 
tags: 
---
בילן
'to bark'

ETYMOLOGY
===========
{Why בילן and not בעלן? The FNHDW notes that billen sometimes appears as the infinitive and plural form, but regards it as analogical to the 2nd and 3rd person singulars: du billst, er billt. But the Eastern Yiddish form shows that billen was probably a legitimate variant.}
Icelandic bjalla 'to chatter; to croak', belja 'to low (of cows)', OE bellan 'to bellow, roar, bark', English to bell, to bellow, OHG bellan 'to bark, resound', MHG bellen 'to bark', ENHG bellen, billen, NHG bellen < PGmc. *bellan- 'to roar, bark' (DRV) - a back-formation from the iterative *bullōn- < *bʰlh₁-néh₂-
{DW² 4: 951; FNHDW "bellen"; Kluge/Seebold 2011: 108; Kroonen 2013: 58; Lexer 1: 174}

WESTERN
========

Tate bil du!
{Maißim un Schnokes vun e Handelewos, LEIPZIG 1845: 40}
	•	E Hund muß billen. {44}

bellen, billen {HOLLAND, Beem, Jerosche}
	•	Fortgegessen un bellen gelost. Var. Angeheert un bellen gelŏsen 'let someone talk and do not care about his opinion' {Jerosche №41}
	•	Isch hob 'm billen gelŏsen {Jerosche №41}
	•	Wen man e hond gutes toot, dan belt er (bilt). 'When you do good to a dog, then it barks. Don't expect thankfulness.' {Jerosche №355}

bęln̥ {WTCP, Budapest, Hutterer 1965: 135}

bilt (3rd p. sg.) {WTCP, SOUTHWESTERN HUNGARY, Garvin 1965: 95}

gəbʲilʲt געבילט {WTCP, Vác, 47197}

hɔt gəbiˆlʲn̩ {WTCP, Berettyó-Újfalu, 47212}

CENTRAL
========

hot gəbiln האָט געבילן {ETCP, Sîg Felső Szek, 47223}

dɛ hɩnt ɔt gəbɪ́lʲt דער הונט האָט געבילט {POLAND, Wolbrom, 50196}

de hɩnt hot gəbɩʎ-t דער הונט האָט געבילט {POLAND, Warsaw, 52211}

NORTHEASTERN
==============

געבולן {זאַמעט}
{מאַרק, "אונדזער ליטווישער ייִדיש" (1951): 457}

gɩbúɫn̩, gʲɩbiɫt {LITHUANIA, Vilnius, 54257}
